# **csuthesis** #
The graduate school at Colorado State University has very specific formatting rules for theses and dissertations.  The goal of this project is to build a LaTeX document class that can be used to easily produce theses and dissertations that automatically meet those formatting rules, with a minimum amount of effort on the user's part.  Just to be clear, this is a labor of love on my part, and is not officially recognized or supported by CSU.  Furthermore, it is still a work in progress.  I graduate in spring of 2014.

## If you use the class ##
I wish I could make the following statement flash bright red: **This is still a work in progress, so please keep me aware of any issues you encounter if you use this class.  Specifically I would like to know about any interactions you have with the graduate school, so as to better ensure that the class meets the standards.  If you submit a thesis and they say that changes need to be made, I can probably make those changes for you, and they are probably changes that need to be made to the class itself, not just to your document.**  I also want to know about your successes, so let me know if your thesis gets accepted (currently it seems like everyone has required at least some modification, but I can hope).  Also, don't underrate yourself.  If you make some change that you think improves the document class, your improvement can probably help future students, so email it to me and I'll consider adding it to the class or describing it in the template.  You can find my email by clicking on "famousleif" over to the left under members (I don't want to actually type it here, so as to avoid bots).  Or you can guess my email.  Hint: I use gmail and my username is famousleif.

## Downloading the Class ##
You can use the download button to the left of this screen, but know that that will give you an already-outdated work in progress.  For the latest version, go to the "source" tab, and use svn to get the most current version of everything.  This will give you a few extra files, mostly template-related stuff used for testing. Technically the only thing you really need is the basic class definition `csuthesis.cls` (as well as a working LaTeX compiler with the standard stuff).  To save you a click or two, here is how to download the latest version of all the files (templates, class, aux files) from the command line:
```
# Non-members may check out a read-only working copy anonymously over HTTP.
svn checkout http://csu-thesis.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/ csu-thesis-read-only
```
Or you can go to the "source" tab, click on the "browse" button, and browse your way to "trunk", where all the files are stored.  Be sure to download the actual files, not the automatically generated html wrappers for the files.  There should be a tiny little link over on the lower right.

## Purpose ##
LaTeX is a very powerful typesetting tool, but its main power and utility lie in the fact that users can write a document in a logical manner, and LaTeX does the typesetting automatically.  The user never has to format their work, only organize it.  Once organized, logical rules are applied to set the type.  For people who use LaTeX, the formatting requirements of the CSU grad school are quite difficult to meet, because they require extensive "under the hood" work in LaTeX.  There are a relatively large number of LaTeX templates floating around various departments, but they lack consistency, are often difficult to use, and just basically are not the elegant and correct way to implement the required changes.  This document class is designed to make all the changes and tweaks just once, so that grad students can write their thesis just like any other paper or report, and have all the formatting rules met automatically.

## More Detailed Description of the Class ##
This class is basically a wrapper for the `amsbook` class that is supplied with the standard distribution of LaTeX.  We have added on `\include` commands for a number of other packages that you probably would have needed to add anyway, such as natbib and graphicx.  We then overwrote a lot of the commands in order to change the formatting.  The class should be relatively stand-alone, in that you shouldn't need any additional LaTeX packages that are not already standard.  I realized quite far in to this project that I had the `texlive-extra` package installed on my computer while developing this class, instead of just `texlive-base`.  This means that there are, regrettably, a few extra .sty files that you may need to download, especially if you use windows or a mac.  Hopefully Google is useful in getting that sorted out.

The class should meet the formatting rules as of February 2014.  I don't know how often the rules are changed.

## Usage ##
I'm going to assume a medium level of LaTeX proficiency for most of these descriptions.  To improve you TeX-fu, I recommend The Not-so Short Introduction to LaTeX2e (google it), and Google.  However, this was pieced together in several chunks, so sometimes I describe things pretty basically, and sometimes I talk about moderately upper-level subtleties.

Technically, all that is required is csuthesis.cls and the standard texlive libraries. You could download the class definition, then make a LaTeX file starting with `\documentclass{csuthesis}` in the same folder as the downloaded class definition, and no other downloads should be needed. In fact, it's probably a very good idea to download the `.cls` file, the `.tex` template that uses it, and make sure that you can produce a usable output from that template before spending any time on other issues.

Simple though the file structure is for this document class, several new commands have been defined in that class, some of which _need_ to be called for the document to compile (this is bad programming practice, but then again, nobody is paying me to do this).  These custom commands are mostly ways of telling the document class some of the information that it needs to make your title page, for example, your advisor and committee.  I have written up a basic description of most of them, but it would be a good idea to download the sample thesis `.tex` file, and modify that template with your own information.

Also, note that because the formatting rules extend to make requirements on the bibliography, we have written natbib into the class definition in order to modify its output.  If you want to use another bibliography tool (for example, if you want Chicago-style citations), you'll need to modify your version of the class file.  A sample hack to use Chicago-style citations is in `example_chicagorefs.tex`, but be aware that for that example to compile you will need to download the `chicago` package, and modify your copy of `csuthesis.cls`, as described in the example file.

Some (probably not all) of the custom commands that you will need to know about are:

In the header:
  * `\departmentname`: the name of your department or school, to be placed on the title page.  I called `\departmentname{Department of Physics}` in my thesis.
  * `\advisor`: your advisor, for the title page
  * `\coadvisor`: _optional_ your co-advisor.  If you have no co-advisor, don't use this command and everything will be fine.
  * `\committee`: use to define your committee.  Separate committee members with `\and`.  The school requires just names for committee names, no honorifics.  So your honorable professor doctor John Doe would be just "John Doe" on this list. If your committee were Prof. John Doe and Dr. Jane Deere, you would write: `\committee{John Doe \and Jane Deere}` in your header.
  * `\gradterm`: used to define your graduation term ("Spring", "Fall", or "Summer"), for the title page.  If for some reason you need to set the year also, see the next command.  I plan to graduate this spring, so I used: `\gradterm{Spring}`.
  * `\gradyear`: _optional_ used to define the year that you are graduating (also used on the copyright page).  By default, this will be the current year and you will not need to use this command at all.
  * `\masterof`: _optional_ Used (in conjunction with the `masterof` option) to define a custom Master's degree.  If you are getting a Master of Business Communication degree, you would use `\documentclass[masterof]{csuthesis}` up top, then somewhere in your preamble you would also have `\masterof{Business Communication}`.  If you don't include the `masterof` option with documentclass, this command will be ignored.
In the document:
  * `\preliminarypage`: _optional_ Used to insert your own preliminary page, such as a list of symbols, list of keywords, etc.  Examples of its use are in `symbolstest.tex`.  Basically it typesets the title of your page in the right format, and adds it to the table of contents.  Beyond that, you're on your own (for example, if you're listing symbols, you have to set up the list yourself).  That `example_prelimpages.tex` file is a bit of a template, with a couple formats that I liked, but very little is automated in this command.  If you use this, make sure you use it after `\tableofcontents`, but **before** `\mainmatter`.  The command takes two arguments.  The first is the name of the page, and the second is the page content.  If you wanted to dedicate the dissertation to your cat, you would write: `\preliminarypage{Dedication}{This dissertation is dedicated to my cat, Fifi.  You are the cat of my life.}`.

Environments of note:
  * `abstract`: place your abstract in the `abstract` environment.  Be sure to write your abstract before `\maketitle`, since `\maketitle` places the abstract in a specific place relative to the title.
  * `acknowledgements`: _optional_ used to thank the stepping stones along your way.  Like `abstract`, be sure to call this environment before `\maketitle` if you do call it.  If omitted, no acknowledgements page will be generated.
  * `sidewayspage` _optional_ If you want to include any wide figures or tables within your document, there are specific rules about how they should be presented.  Specifically, the page number needs to rotate with the figure or table.  This environment creates a floating page that is rotated just right.  There are some minor quirks to this environment, but if they actually trouble you, then it's probably well within your ability to work past them.  Specifically, this forces the stack of floating figures to be written to the document before the blank rotated page can be written.  Also, the floating figure that you place on this page is not really bound to this page.  It is conceivable that the float would drift to another page sometimes.  This happens a lot if your float is a little too big to fit on a single page.  This environment is more about the float property than it is about general sideways pages.  If you have multi-page sideways content, you'll need a different approach. A sample modification is shown in the file `example_sidewayscontent.tex`.

Document class options:

Class options are extra options you can hand to the document class that make global changes to how your document is typeset.  They are on line one of the document.  For example, the current format test has the `draft` option turned on, so the first line of that file is `\documentclass[draft]{csuthesis}`.  To make your thesis a master's thesis that's still in `draft` mode, you would change that to `\documentclass[draft, masters]{csuthesis}`.  Here are the options available.  (More options are possible: the `amsbook` options.  These are the ones that I have added, or thought important.)
  * `draft`: Draft mode does not actually go find all your figures and render them, it just prints out a blank box where the figures ought to be.  If you're having this problem in your thesis, remove this option.
  * `copyrightpage`: _deprecated_ Tells csuthesis to make a copyright page.  Passing this option will automatically generate a copyright page, using your `\author` name and the `\gradyear` (if you do not specify `\gradyear`, the current year is used).  As of February 2014, the copyright page is mandatory, so this is now automated, not optional.
  * `masters`: Is this a thesis, not a dissertation?  The formatting rules are the same except for a word or two changed.  Use the `masters` option to typeset a master's thesis.  By default, you will see Master of Science on your title page.
  * `masterof`: Not all master's degrees are masters of science.  You can get a Master of Engineering, a Master of Environmental Management, and a whole plethora of others.  This option alerts the document class that you are going to specify what you are a master of. In the header of your document, you will need to use the \masterof{Stuff} command, or else you'll be a Master of Fine Arts.
  * `nonscience`: _deprecated_ This is what I had in place before implementing `masterof`.  It's still there, but the better way to go is to use `masterof`, instead.
  * `nosmallcaps`: Different reviewers have slightly different interpretations of the formatting rules.  In one or two cases, they have not liked the smallcaps font shape in the preliminary pages.  (Smallcaps is the font where all the letters are uppercase, but "real" uppercase letters are larger than the rest.)  If you get your dissertation back and they ask you to remove the smallcaps from the preliminary pages, just add this option and recompile.  It's a little unclear how this should affect the bibliography/references, since in theory the rules say that heading should match chapter headings, but in practice the reviewers often seem to associate the bibliography with the preliminary pages.  As of this revision, `nosmallcaps` will remove smallcaps from the bibliography as well.

## Contributors and Thanks ##
This has mostly been my own work, but I should also thank Dr. Dan Brake (recently graduated from the math department... relatively recently... during the first year of this project), Fran Compana at the library, Katherine Zaunbrecher in physics, and Natalie Anderson my wife, for their help in checking the output, suggesting tweaks to the code and style, and moral support.  Also thanks to all the people that have downloaded the class, used it, and offered coherent feedback, either from the graduate school or from their own modifications and observations.  In particular, I'm thinking of Chris Strickland, Fayyaz ul Amir Afsar Minhas, Derek Blash, Dusty Ross, Matthew Niemerg, and a few others that I forgot to keep track of.  Extra thanks to those who fixed their problems faster than I could reply to their emails, and then (wait for it, this is the crucial part) emailed me to tell me how they had fixed things.

I wish you all the best of luck on your defenses.